README.md, before:

# HTTP-Server
> An HTTP server built from scratch using C++. This is a group project that was completed by @otmanewahdani and @flouta.

## Table of Contents
* [Overview](#overview)
* [Features](#features)
* [Setup](#setup)
* [Configuration](#configuration)
* [Usage](#usage)
* [Demo](#demo)
* [Project Status](#project-status)
* [Acknowledgements](#acknowledgements)

## Overview
- This web server implements HTTP/1.1 as described by [RFC 2616](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2616). All features were developed using C++98 and the STL library. No boost or any external library was used.
- This server can manage multiple connections and requests at once without using any concurrent programming whatoever. Everything is managed by a single thread that makes use of I/O multiplexing.
- For networking, it uses socket APIs provided by UNIX systems.

## Features
- GET, POST, DELETE methods
- Can be configured with a configuration file (see [Configuration](#configuration) section)
- CGI script execution through CGI/1.1 interface as defined by [RFC 3875](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3875)
- Cookies and session management
- Logs its operations in a log file (see [Demo](#demo) section)
- Hosts multiple websites
- Accepts direct uploads

## Configuration

## Setup
- It is a no brainer that if you want to use this server you will need a c++ compiler (preferrably gcc or clang).
- A Unix environment was used to develop and test this program, specifically Linux and Darwin for MacOs. So no guarantees that it will compile smoothly in any other environment. For Linux, Bash is needed. And for a Darwin-based Macos, Zsh works best with the building process.


## Usage
First in your terminal, clone and go to the base directory:
```bash
git clone https://github.com/otmanewahdani/http-server.git && cd http-server
```
- ### Compiling and running the demo programs
  The Makefile has rules for compiling 3 separate demo programs (which are the main.cpp's in each container's directory) that demonstrate the 3 containers: vector, stack and map. So for compiling and running the demo program, do the following :
  
  ```bash
  make map && cd map && ./map
  ```
  :bulb: The same procedure works for the other two containers, just substitute map with vector or stack.<br />
  
  :warning: The program output is long and unintelligible since it's only meant to be used by the testing script.<br />
  
- ### Running the tests
  Like it was explained in the features section, each container can be benchmarked and tested separately against the original STL containers. Thus make sure you are in the base directory (same location as the Makefile) and run the following to execute the tests:
  ```bash
    make test-map
  ```
  :bulb: if you want to test the other containers, just keep the same command and substitute map with the name of the container.<br />
  #### Illustration
  <img src="./.img/container testing illustration.gif" alt="Illustration of how container tests are run" width="600" height="100" />
- ### Using the Library in your own program
  1. #### Including the library's header files
      First, in your preprocessor include directive use only the name of the header file like this:
      ```c++
      #include <vector.hpp>
      #include <map.hpp>
      #include <stack.hpp>
      #include <type_traits.hpp>
      #include <utility.hpp>
      #include <iterator.hpp>
      #include <algorithm.hpp>
      ```
      :bulb: It's not necessary to include all of the header files, just include the ones you need.<br />
      
      Then, specify the path to ft_containers in any way you want (I included an example on how you might wanna do it, just replace parent-directories with the file path leading to ft_containers) and supplement the following flags to your compiler:
      ```bash
      export FT_CONTAINERS_PATH="parent-directories/ft_containers"
      export FT_CONTAINERS_INCS="-I$FT_CONTAINERS_PATH/vector/incs -I$FT_CONTAINERS_PATH/map/incs -I$FT_CONTAINERS_PATH/stack/incs -I$FT_CONTAINERS_PATH/algorithm -I$FT_CONTAINERS_PATH/iterator -I$FT_CONTAINERS_PATH/utility -I$FT_CONTAINERS_PATH/type_traits"
      
      <your-compiler> <your-program-source-files> $FT_CONTAINERS_INCS
      ```
      :bulb: Again you don't need to use all the flags. Only use what you need<br />
  2. #### Using the containers in your code
      They will be used the same way as the STL containers with only a slight difference. Since the standard containers are defined in the std namespace, std is prepended along with the scope resolution operator to the name of the container like this:
      ```c++
      std::vector<int> emptyVector;
      ```
      But for this library ft needs to be prepended to all type names like the following:
      ```c++
      ft::map<int, char*> emptyMap;
      ```

## Project Status
Project is: _complete_


## Acknowledgements
This project is part of our 1337 school (42 network) curriculum. So We would like to thank our school for giving us the opportunity to work on a project that taught us a lot of new things.

Commit message:

Update README.md -> config section

README.md, after:

# HTTP-Server
> An HTTP server built from scratch using C++. This is a group project that was completed by @otmanewahdani and @flouta.

## Table of Contents
* [Overview](#overview)
* [Features](#features)
* [Setup](#setup)
* [Configuration](#configuration)
* [Usage](#usage)
* [Demo](#demo)
* [Project Status](#project-status)
* [Acknowledgements](#acknowledgements)

## Overview
- This web server implements HTTP/1.1 as described by [RFC 2616](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2616). All features were developed using C++98 and the STL library. No boost or any external library was used.
- This server can manage multiple connections and requests at once without using any concurrent programming whatoever. Everything is managed by a single thread that makes use of I/O multiplexing.
- For networking, it uses socket APIs provided by UNIX systems.

## Features
- GET, POST, DELETE methods
- Can be configured with a configuration file (see [Configuration](#configuration) section)
- CGI script execution through CGI/1.1 interface as defined by [RFC 3875](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3875)
- CGI timeout (it is a useful in that some faulty scripts can waste the server's resources by running for too long)
- Cookies and session management
- Logs its operations in a log file (see [Demo](#demo) section)
- Hosts multiple websites
- Autoindex (directory listing)
- Accepts direct uploads

## Configuration
- You can create a configuration file and pass it as the first argument to the program or change [defaultConfigFileName in Config.cpp in line 9](srcs/Config/Config.cpp) so that the program can directly pick your default config file without passing it as the first argument.
- There are 2 contexts in the configuration file grammar:
  1. #### Server Context:
  Since this http server supports hosting multiple websites, multiple servers can be setup to create a customized configuration for each website. Even the same website or service can be handled with different servers using different parameters. These parameters can be tuned using these following keywords:
  
    - server: this is how you open a server's context. All the keywords that will be listed next can only to be included within this context and need to be surrounded by an opening curly brace and a closing one. Anything outside this braced scoping doesn't belong to that specified context.
    - server_name: specifies the host name of the server. It's the same as the Host header fieald in an http request.
    - listen: directs the server to listen on a specific ip address and port using this notation (address:port). If the address or/and port are ommitted, it listens by default respectively on 0.0.0.0 or/and 8080.
    - client_body_size_max: limits the client's body to a max number of bytes that can be sent with a POST request. a 0 value or if ommitted, no limit is applied. A 413 status code is retuned in case, a client's request body surpasses this limit.
    - error_pages: web pages or files along with status codes can be set to be returned when an error happens. For example, when a 404 error is detected, the server will search for a 404 page that is set to be returned in case of a 404 error, if it finds one it will include it in the response.
   
  2. #### Location Context:
  This is a nested context within the server context. Like the server context's keywords, the location context cannot exists outside of the server's context. The location scope specifies parameters for URL routes. URLs for the same server can have different configurations depending on which location context they fall under. Here is its grammar:
  
  - location: This is the keyword the declares the location context. It must be followed by the configured route and an open curly brace and just as the server context, all locations parameters will be terminated by a closing brace. if the route argument is a directory, the configuration will be applied to all URLs that are subpaths of this route. If the route is a specific file, then the parameters will apply to URL only. The keywords that come next can only be used within this context.
  - allow_methods: HTTP request methods that are allowed. if not specified, GET is enabled by default.
  - redirect: redirects all requests to the specified URL along with the specified status code. Only redirection status codes are allowed.
  - root: if defined, the root path is the actual path of the location's route on the server's filesystem. if root is set as /path/to/website, location path is set to / and the URL is /index.html, Then the server replaces '/' by '/path/to/website' and the URL becomes '/path/to/website/index.html'. If no root is set, then the current working directory is the root.
  - default: specifies a file to be served if the URL requests a directory.
  - autoindex: enables directory listing if the requested URL is a directory and autoindex is set to 'on'. if set to 'off' or not specified, then it is not enabled.
  - cgi: specifies a cgi script's extension (like .php) and an executable path (e.g /bin/php) to be used for running scripts with that extension.
  - upload: defines an absolute path of a directory where uploads will be saved. Uploads will be automatically triggered if the requested method is POST, the URL is a directory and upload is enabled for that URL's location.

## Setup
- It is a no brainer that if you want to use this server you will need a c++ compiler (preferrably gcc or clang).
- A Unix environment was used to develop and test this program, specifically Linux and Darwin for MacOs. So no guarantees that it will compile smoothly in any other environment. For Linux, Bash is needed. And for a Darwin-based Macos, Zsh works best with the building process.


## Usage
First in your terminal, clone and go to the base directory:
```bash
git clone https://github.com/otmanewahdani/http-server.git && cd http-server
```
- ### Compiling and running the demo programs
  The Makefile has rules for compiling 3 separate demo programs (which are the main.cpp's in each container's directory) that demonstrate the 3 containers: vector, stack and map. So for compiling and running the demo program, do the following :
  
  ```bash
  make map && cd map && ./map
  ```
  :bulb: The same procedure works for the other two containers, just substitute map with vector or stack.<br />
  
  :warning: The program output is long and unintelligible since it's only meant to be used by the testing script.<br />
  
- ### Running the tests
  Like it was explained in the features section, each container can be benchmarked and tested separately against the original STL containers. Thus make sure you are in the base directory (same location as the Makefile) and run the following to execute the tests:
  ```bash
    make test-map
  ```
  :bulb: if you want to test the other containers, just keep the same command and substitute map with the name of the container.<br />
  #### Illustration
  <img src="./.img/container testing illustration.gif" alt="Illustration of how container tests are run" width="600" height="100" />
- ### Using the Library in your own program
  1. #### Including the library's header files
      First, in your preprocessor include directive use only the name of the header file like this:
      ```c++
      #include <vector.hpp>
      #include <map.hpp>
      #include <stack.hpp>
      #include <type_traits.hpp>
      #include <utility.hpp>
      #include <iterator.hpp>
      #include <algorithm.hpp>
      ```
      :bulb: It's not necessary to include all of the header files, just include the ones you need.<br />
      
      Then, specify the path to ft_containers in any way you want (I included an example on how you might wanna do it, just replace parent-directories with the file path leading to ft_containers) and supplement the following flags to your compiler:
      ```bash
      export FT_CONTAINERS_PATH="parent-directories/ft_containers"
      export FT_CONTAINERS_INCS="-I$FT_CONTAINERS_PATH/vector/incs -I$FT_CONTAINERS_PATH/map/incs -I$FT_CONTAINERS_PATH/stack/incs -I$FT_CONTAINERS_PATH/algorithm -I$FT_CONTAINERS_PATH/iterator -I$FT_CONTAINERS_PATH/utility -I$FT_CONTAINERS_PATH/type_traits"
      
      <your-compiler> <your-program-source-files> $FT_CONTAINERS_INCS
      ```
      :bulb: Again you don't need to use all the flags. Only use what you need<br />
  2. #### Using the containers in your code
      They will be used the same way as the STL containers with only a slight difference. Since the standard containers are defined in the std namespace, std is prepended along with the scope resolution operator to the name of the container like this:
      ```c++
      std::vector<int> emptyVector;
      ```
      But for this library ft needs to be prepended to all type names like the following:
      ```c++
      ft::map<int, char*> emptyMap;
      ```

## Project Status
Project is: _complete_


## Acknowledgements
This project is part of our 1337 school (42 network) curriculum. So We would like to thank our school for giving us the opportunity to work on a project that taught us a lot of new things.
